# comphomalg: a computational homological algebra library

Copyright (c) 2019, Michael Robinson

## Synopsis

This library contains functions for manipulating sequences of linear maps and maps between these sequences, or in other words "tools for homological algebra".  The library was written for use with GNU Octave.  It is eventually intended to work on Matlab as well.

High level capabilities:
1. Barcode (interval) decompositions for sequences of linear maps
2. Chain map decompositions (maps between chain complexes)
3. Render the above in LaTeX using XyPic

The library is structured so that there are functions to _construct_ and _decompose_ sequences and sequence maps.  The construction and decomposition operations should be inverse operations, and the unit tests verify this.  The focus is primarily on integer or easy-to-manipulate rational matrix entries, so that examples can be generated that are suitable for manual calculation.  There is a simple LaTeX rendering toolbox so that these examples can be easily included in documents.  The library should be reasonably performant for examples that are larger as well.

## Basic linear algebra tools

Homological algebra is built upon linear algebra, and requires a few extensions to the standard functions available in Octave or Matlab.

|Name | Description |
| --- | ---       |
|`nice_square_matrix` | generates matrices suitable for manual calculations |
|`kernel` | computes the kernel of a matrix using the method of free columns and should agree with the builtin `null` as far as dimensions are concerned  |
|`quotient_basis` | computes a decomposition of a space into a give subspace and its quotient |
|`canonical_projection` | computes the projection matrix onto a quotient of a vector space by a subspace  |
|`induced_map` | computes the map on the quotient induced by a given linear map |

Most of the generator functions come in two "flavors": a permutation flavor and a "scramble" flavor.  The latter makes use of the `nice_square_matrix` to specify a transformation from the canonical basis to one that's not, but the transformation should be "easy to work with" manually.  That is, its determinant should not be too large, and its components should not be too small.  This keeps each of the entries during row reduction to be rational numbers with reasonably small denominators.

> Do be sure to check the matrices generated by `nice_square_matrix` and its callers to make sure that it hasn't made any unlucky choices!

## Sequences of linear maps

The fundamental object in the study of homological algebra is that of a _sequence_ of linear maps.  These are represented as cellarrays of matrices, so that consecutive matrices can be multiplied.  Every such sequence is isomorphic to a sum of _bars_, or sequences consisting of a short string of consecutive 1-dimensional spaces.

|Name | Top level | Script | Generator | Decomposer|
| --- | ---       | ---    | ---       | ---       |
|`barcode_generator` | Y |  | Y | | 
|`barcode_generator_scramble` | Y  | | Y | | 
|`barcode_scramble_mats` | Y |  | Y | | 
|`barcode_decompose` | Y |  | | Y | 
|`barcode_reader` | Y | | | Y | 
|`chain_complex_unittest` | Y  | Y | Y | Y | 
|`barcode_reader_unittest` | Y  | Y | Y | Y | 

The two `_unittest` files are scripts meant to be run from the Octave command line.  They run an end-to-end analysis, first generating a random sequence by way of specifying its barcode, constructing the sequence from that, and then decomposing the sequence.  It should be the case that the decomposition recovers the barcode, and the `_unittest` scripts verify that.

The `barcode_scramble_mats` function is special, in that it takes an existing sequence, and produces a random sequence map to shuffle the bases.

## Sequence and chain maps

Given sequences of linear maps as objects, their corresponding morphisms are sequence maps: commutative ladder diagrams.  These are represented as a triple of cellarrays of matrices:

1. The domain sequence (length `N`), usually called `mats1`
2. The codomain sequence (length `N`), usually called `mats2`
3. The sequence of component maps (length `N+1`), usually called `comps`

As in the case of sequences, there are generator and decomposers... However, there is an important mathematical difference.  General sequence maps are quite complicated, and do not respect barcode decompositions.  However, sequence maps between chain complexes (_chain_complexes_ for short) do respect barcode decompositions.  Therefore, most of the functions deal only with chain maps.

|Name | Top level | Script | Generator | Decomposer|
| --- | ---       | ---    | ---       | ---       |
|`is_sequence_map` |  | | | | 
|`chain_map_generator` | Y  | | Y |  | 
|`chain_map_unittest` | Y  | Y | Y |  | 
|`chain_map_generator_scramble` | Y  |  | Y |  | 
|`chain_map_decompose` | Y  |  |  | Y | 
|`chain_map_decompose_unittest` | Y  |  | Y | Y | 
|`bar_chain_map_to_bar` |   |  |  |  | 
|`quasi_isos` | Y  | Y | Y |  |

Chain maps decompose into a sum of _bar_chain_maps_, which are short chain maps (three index).  These are defined according to their _Type_ which is coded according to the following table.  Each pair of rows specifies a bar chain map, with the domain above the codomain.  Each space is either blank (trivial space) or `R` (for a 1-dimensional space).  Maps go from left to right, and are all of maximal rank.

|Type | Index 1 | Index 2 | Index 3 |
| --- | :---:   | :---:   | :---:   |
| 1   |         |         |         |
|     |         |         |         |
| 2   |         |         |         |
|     |   R     |         |         |
| 3   |         |         |         |
|     |   R     |   R     |         |
| 4   |   R     |         |         |
|     |         |         |         |
| 5   |   R     |         |         |
|     |   R     |         |         |
| 6   |         |   R     |         |
|     |   R     |   R     |         |
| 7   |   R     |   R     |         |
|     |         |         |         |
| 8   |   R     |   R     |         |
|     |   R     |         |         |
| 9   |   R     |   R     |         |
|     |   R     |   R     |         |
| 10  |         |   R     |    R    |
|     |    R    |   R     |         |

Since each bar chain map implies two chain complexes -- domain and codomain -- there is a function `bar_chain_map_to_bar` to translate a bar chain map Type into a bar as used by the sequence generator functions.

## Rendering capabilities

Typesetting large commutative ladders labeled with matrices is usually a time-consuming exercise.  On the other hand, these kind of diagrams are predictable enough to be automatically typeset in LaTeX.  The diagrams produced rely on the XyPic sublanguage of LaTeX.

|Name | Top level | XyPic |
| --- | ---       | ---    |
|`render_barcode` | Y  | N |
|`render_matrix` |   | N |
|`render_sequence` | Y  | Y |
|`render_sequence_map` | Y  | Y |

